---
layout: post
title: Kegan's Levels (or Constructive Developmental Theory)
last_updated: 2016-03-15
belief: likely
status: nearly finished
summary: |
    Dissection of Kegan's levels and whether the theory has any useful grounds.
---

## Introduction

As soon as I stumbled on people talking about Kegan's levels, it captured my curiosity: _"finally, a coherent theory of self-development!"_. My hopes were of course immediately towards actually being able to _use it_. So my advice is to take the theory with a grain of salt.

The core idea of the theory is that there are 5 developmental level into which where you are categorized. The levels are mutually exclusive, but you aren't strictly pigeonholed into a particular level and are usually in a transition from one to another.

Each level is defined by your ability to regard particular _aspects_ of your life as an **object**, rather than being completely **subjected to** it and thus being unable to reflect on them. 

These _aspects_ of life are described by [Berger](https://wiki.canterbury.ac.nz/download/attachments/6358104/berger+on+kegan+narrative.doc) as _aspects of meaning constructing_. 

Huh, _meaning_? I believe that _meaning_ here points to values when it is in our **object** space, and _subconsciously identifying with the values_ when **subjected to** an aspect. The aspects are as follows:

* reflexes (1st level object) 
* impulses, perceptions (2nd level object, 1st level subject) 
* needs, interests, desires (3rd level object, 2nd level subject) 
* interpersonal relationships, mutuality (4th level object, 3rd level subject) 
* self-authorship, identity, ideology (5th level object, 4th level subject)

(Clearly the list are simply labels which don't do much in helping to embrace the full extent of what is seen as an object on each level. There's an image of a table that uses these labels, but neither the table or the diagrams seem to provide much value, unless you already understand the theory, but here it is anyway: [5 stages of development](http://i.imgur.com/K4AVFbW.png).)

What makes the theory _constructive_ and _developmental_ is that each level builds on the object-level understanding of the previous level, thus _developing_ to higher levels can be seen as _constructing_ understanding of reality. It's like 5 matryoshka dolls inside each other.

## Levels

### Level 0/1

The first level usually only governs small children, in which there are no rules, no laws seeming to govern reality. Everything is an extension of oneself, a playground of sorts, or a dream you cannot make sense of. Transition out of this stage is via acquiring an understanding of reality that the things you sense _might not actually be yourself after all_, but rather can continue existing after you have stopped paying attention to them.

### Level 2

The second level is the domain of mostly older children and adolescents, with adults possibly spending many years here as well. Here beliefs, rules seem rigid, and learned patterns about the world feel constant. Kegan argues that on this level the individual cannot tell lies as they cannot hold both their own perspective and another's at the same time. In a nutshell, on this level you are a selfish agent (you don't know you're selfish) acting in a world with no regard to others' motives or consequences that may come of it.  

### Level 3

The third level is where internal values come to play. The values are drawn from external influencers, and are used in decision making, including self-reflection. Should there be any conflicting ideologies or values from the influencers, you consult others how to resolve these conflicts. Dealing with the conflict, if told to resolve that yourself, you become even more confused and at a loss than before. Since _selfishishness_ contradicts so many of the acquired external values on the third level, it is also very difficult to break out of this in order to transition to the upper level (where self-esteem comes from an independendly-constructed reality of self). The _rightness_ of a decision ultimately is judged by other agents and on this level you try your best to satisfy that. Approximately 58% of the adult population is at this level or lower. 

Excerpt of case study from [Berger](https://wiki.canterbury.ac.nz/download/attachments/6358104/berger+on+kegan+narrative.doc):

>Walter’s Third order meaning system means that he finds himself over his head, though, when he is faced with issues or decisions that require him to make independent judgments.  To know whether he’s doing a good job as a teacher, Walter turns to others.  He wants a class where “there’s not any more argument from the students” and barring that, wants at least “to find support from the…other teachers or…[be able] to relay a story and to have them say, ‘I thought you handled that well.’”  Without such positive feedback, he asks, “What’s the meaning of life here?”  Part of the necessity for the feedback is that without it Walter has no way to decide whether he was a successful teacher.  “It’s just a mystery,” he says.


### Level 4

In the fourth level of Kegan's framework, the biggest shift comes in that the _self_ comes into existence. All of the previous ideologies, opinions, views can be viewed as objects rather than being subjected to them directly. They become managable, governable, and you can use them to further develop your own values and can correct yourself as new information comes in. The opinions of others are still taken into account, however in this level the _self_ comes into importance in making decisions. Thanks to all of this, you cannot become as confused at this level by conflicting meaning systems, because you have your own system which to make decisions with. However, should the inner meaning system be at conflict with itself, it cannot be easily resolved.

Excerpt of case study from [Berger](https://wiki.canterbury.ac.nz/download/attachments/6358104/berger+on+kegan+narrative.doc):

>Instead of taking responsibility for his students’ actions, José has perspective on them.  He says, “I didn’t feel as kind of personally betrayed but rather like they had stepped off this track of working hard, working honestly, kind of maximizing their potential…. And it didn’t feel so much like a personal affront but rather I thought that this was the kind of student you were and you showed me differently…”  At the Third order, a teacher would be embedded in a particular ideology or institution—or even in the relationship with students or colleagues.  Because he is in the Fourth order, José can hold on to a separate feeling of self while simultaneously feeling that the students betrayed the contract of the classroom.

### Level 5

Kegan asserts that the fifth level is never seen before midlife. In the fifth level you have learned the limits of your inner meaning system and the limits of any identities you might hold. You start seeing more similarities and overlappings between the inner systems of other people. You deal better with controversies and paradoxes. You see problems with different decision making systems, admitting that there might also be a better one than you currently hold. One of such problems can be that your system can contribute to your inability to see better alternatives.

Excerpt of case study from [Berger](https://wiki.canterbury.ac.nz/download/attachments/6358104/berger+on+kegan+narrative.doc):

>By the time Kathleen was in her early 50s, she had become chief counsel for in a large government agency.  During her fast rise through the early years in her profession, she was “much more willing, for the sake of prestige, status, intellectual challenge” not to have what she would later think of as her “whole self” engaged in her work.  While emphasizing the “whole person” and being “a leader in doing that” with her staff, Kathleen “was much less in touch with what that actually meant to me.”  While her work “mattered to me a lot and was important to do,” Kathleen never “felt like it was an expression of who I was.”

## Issues

### 1

And now that you've read all this...

The theory becomes kind of flat and fluffless when we simply use the core ideas from each level (taken from [Stanford mailing list](http://cgi.stanford.edu/~dept-ctl/tomprof/posting.php?ID=1110), includes 0th level, rephrased for clarity):

| Level   | Philosophy   |
| -----   | ----------   |
| 0 | living in an objectless world, a world in which everything sensed is taken to be an extension of oneself |
| 1 | thinking fantastic and illogical, feelings impulsive and fluid, social-relating egocentric |
| 2 | rules, sets of directions, and dualisms give shape and structure to one's daily activity |
| 3 | other people are experienced as sources of internal validation, orientation, or authority |
| 4 | the capacity to take responsibility for and ownership of one's internal authority |
| 5 | recognizing commonalities and interdependence with others |


### 2

Kegan's theory keeps emphasising how hard it is to reach level 5 and usually not before midlife and even then it's _really_ unlikely. But I dare to digress. So let's see where we are...

In order to beat level 0 all I need to do is understand that I am not everything. Umm, check.

Do I acknowledge my impulses and perceptions? Yup, definitely. Level 1 beat so that means I am now at level 2.

Can my _needs_, interests, desires be seen as an object? I really don't _need_ to answer that. Hah. Level 3.

I reason about my relationships with other people. I have a governing _self_ and if my influences disagree with me on matter of values, _I_ stay on top. I self-reflect, see problems, adjust behavior. There seems to be no way I am not at least level 4.

And finally, the mythical level 5. It seems to me that anyone who has a foundation in probability theory and has brought it into life must necessarily be at this level. 

The aspects of level 5 are reasonably straightforward to understand on the basis of probability theory and logic and its many implications, such as:

* seeing the possible limits of your own meaning making system as brains  function unoptimally (which is why we have cognitive biases)
* understanding that personal identity is only in the brain (and any particular identity you might hold might not be best aligned with your true values)
* you can hold a paradox in your brain without malfunctioning (seeing that as merely your [map, not the territory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Map%E2%80%93territory_relation))
* being generally humble about being possibly wrong 

Recognizing commonalities is also sort of a statistical inevitability. I am not sure what is meant by _interdependence with others_, but by the sound of it, in a society we all depend on each other one way or another (possibly by very long causal chains), so that means we're _interdependent_, right?

This is also the biggest peeve with the theory that the categories don't seem really that difficult to achieve for reasonably smart people, even before mid-age (I don't really see how age makes a causal difference here). But I am open to considering [projection bias](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Projection_bias) being in effect here, thinking that everyone can reason themselves through the levels. Maybe it _is_ really hard.

### 3

So when we flatten the ideas of each level, they are easy to obtain. Some might argue that Kegan said this and that also for a particular level, but then it becomes the problem of not being well-defined enough. But if this theory is not well-defined, then how can we really reason about it if it is so vague and open to interpretation? 

If you read [some](http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1055&context=aglecfacpub) of the studies made on categorizing people to these levels, it seems like the tests are still done on pretty subjective basis, like interviewing and asking for people how they think and feel. But for why it is said that level 5 is so hard to achieve is also, I believe, because their described behaviour pattern matches lower levels and so the data comes out in a way that assigns a higher likelihood on the individual belonging to a lower level as well, no matter that they might _actually_ have the object-level understanding of level 5.

### 4

If you study the theory, how can you not immediately become level 5 as a result simply by bringing the _aspects of meaning making_ into your object-space?

### 5

I got nothing out of this theory in the form of knowledge in order to make better life decisions that are aligned to my values. But perhaps that is just my ignorance towards what the theory actually promises it _can_ or _cannot_ do. I didn't find any disclaimers :). 

## Experience

Despite the issues and all of this questionable value and incoherence of the theory leading to believe it is without grounds in reality, I think some people in my life are in level 3 by the theory. I have seen they not have a _governing self_, but rather draw all of their values from other influencers by the looks of it. Their actions seem to be motivated to satisfy their influencers' views, rather than understanding they don't really need to conform and can _Really Do Whatever You Want_. It is not the point of the theory to _categorize_, but to be able to _self-develop_. However, it goes without saying that to get to where you want to be, you first have to know where you stand.


## Potential

Self-development in the current world is done usually in a very crude way. You learn patterns, patterns on top of other patterns, resulting in an ad hoc model of the world ([map is not the territory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Map%E2%80%93territory_relation)). And then you have influencers who preach _it's just the way things are_, even though they might not necessarily mean it to be absolute truth. Then you start seeing serious problems and confusion in life, you try to make even better rules on top of both of these patterns and _truths_, but even these might fall apart in the face of reality. It's all very messy. It would do the world a lot of good if we had a coherent high-level developmental theory that helped people grow into having more accurate models about the world, step-by-step throughout life. 

Until then, we have (a lower level, but still immensely useful) [epistemic and instrumental rationality](https://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Rationality), but unfortunately it has quite a strong filter for intelligence and does not seem to make sense to everyone. (If you disagree with the existence of such filter, let me know!)


## External Links

* [Berger's Summary](https://wiki.canterbury.ac.nz/download/attachments/6358104/berger+on+kegan+narrative.doc)
* [Stanford's Tomorrow's Professor Msg.#1110](http://cgi.stanford.edu/~dept-ctl/tomprof/posting.php?ID=1110)
* [Developmentalobserver's Overview](http://developmentalobserver.blog.com/2010/06/09/an-overview-of-constructive-developmental-theory-cdt/)